Proteomic network modeling.

Response of Ants at Harvard Forest to Climate Change

Project Summary:

Experimental field studies are needed to understand the consequences
of global climatic change for local community structure and associated
ecosystem processes. We propose to use large open-top environmental
chambers to simultaneously manipulate air and soil temperatures using
a statistically powerful and cost-efficient response-surface
(regression) design at two field sites situated in northern and
southern temperate mixed hardwood forests in eastern North America
(Harvard Forest in Massachusetts, Duke Forest in North Carolina). The
proposed field manipulations will reveal the effects of temperature
increases on the populations, communities, and associated ecosystem
services of assemblages of ground-foraging ants. Ants are a model
taxon for studying effects of global climatic change because they
comprise the dominant fraction of animal biomass in many terrestrial
communities and because they provide essential ecosystem services,
including soil turnover, decomposition, and seed dispersal. The
experiment is designed to test three predictions:

- Projected atmospheric warming will lead to declines in ant species
  abundances at the warmer, southern extent of their ranges in the
  US. Conversely, projected atmospheric warming will lead to increases
  in abundance or range extensions of ant species at the cooler,
  northern extent of their ranges in the US.
- Warming will change the relative abundance and composition of ant
  communities, and will lead to the loss of ant biodiversity.
- Warming will potentially diminish ecosystem processes and services
  provided by ants, particularly with respect to the dispersal of
  seeds.

Twelve open-top chambers at each site which will each be exposed to
one of four levels of air temperature increases, ranging from no
change (ambient conditions) to 8 degrees C (commensurate with some
IPCC climate model forecasts for the year 2100). The experiment will
run for 3 consecutive years of continuous warming. The response
variables measured will include ant activity, population densities and
colony sizes of focal species, ant community diversity and species
composition, and rates of seed dispersal and predation as mediated by
ants. This study will provide an experimental test of the hypothesis
that species at the northern and southern boundaries of their ranges
will respond predictably to climatic change. In addition, this
research will further establish ants as a model taxon for the study of
climatic change.
